When we talk about different stories that you've written, feel free to give any
background information on the story because many of the people listening
probably haven't read some of them. And that's always a good way to plug
something. They get interested enough in the story to go out and buy it and read
it? Right, all right. Try to do that. Okay, okay we'll crank off with a real
biggie question here. Okay, how did you get started writing science fiction?
Well, there are sort of two versions of that in a way. There's my official
writing career, which began after I first got married to Werner Vinge, my now ex
-husband. He was a science fiction writer at the time, and I had been a person
who fooled around with writing for a while before that. I would just diddle
around with it. I used to want to be an artist, and writing was just something I
did kind of privately and never showed to anybody and rarely finished anything
either, but Werner encouraged me to take it seriously if I was going to write.
By that time I'd abandoned wanting to be an artist because my college art
professors had ruined my desire to do art. And I was sort of casting about and
he knew that I liked to write and so he encouraged me to attempt to take it
seriously and sit down and do something and finish it. And so I decided that I
would take him up on that. And I started doing a story, which turned out to be
the first story that I sold. It was called Tin Soldier. And when I started
writing it, I didn't know if I'd ever get it finished or anything, but I did get
it finished and I showed it to him and he said he thought it was saleable. And
so I started sending it out and I did sell it. After that, I was hooked, of
course. I wanted to go on being a writer
the bumps are getting the better of us here let me call you back here before I
we do our second question see if we can get a better better line on the phone
okay I'll call you back in about two to three minutes we'll
roll it and try it again let's do a voice test here is the weather still good
okay
we're
not picking up quite as well on this line. No pops, but we're not getting you as
well. Well maybe I'll try to speak a little louder, like I remember to speak
louder, maybe that'll work out. Yeah that sounds fine, not like that. Okay, we
just asked a question on how you guys started writing in science fiction. Okay,
what
role does your background in anthropology have in your writing? Well actually it
does play a pretty big role in the writing because well, I find that
anthropology and science fiction have a lot of things in common for me.
Archaeology was my specialty and archaeology is the anthropology of the past and
science fiction for me is the anthropology of the future. They form sort of a
long continuum and the thing I like about both science fiction and anthropology
is that they allow you to see how other people do things and that other people's
lives are not led the same way yours is and that there are other ways of coping
that aren't necessarily the ones you've always known, that other people do
things differently and get along perfectly well that way. I love the way that
both anthropology and science could take your preconceptions and kind of turn
them around 180 degrees and make you say, gee, I've never thought of it like
that before. Specifically, I like to use my anthropological background, too,
when I'm setting up societies for the stories that I'm going to write. I do sort
of an ethnography, which is a cultural study, only I have to make up details of
the culture in general instead of just studying an anthropological culture. I do
get a lot of details, bits and pieces of interesting societies, which I
recombine sometimes to create science fictional societies. It gives you a way of
thinking that's very useful when you're writing a science fiction story, looking
for different ways, hoping that when you send your rocket ship out into the
galaxy it's not going to come to a planet where everyone acts like 1950s Earth.
You know, I really enjoy exploring differences in societies and things like
that. And, well, mythology is kind of an offshoot of science fiction that I, or
whoops, mythology is an offshoot of anthropology that I find is very useful to
science fiction, too. I get a lot of story ideas from mythology and a lot of I
think just kind of underlying strengths that are almost like fantasy and I like
to weave them into the science fiction which is what I most like to write and I
think it gives them a stronger appeal
possibly being we all have sort of a common background of folktales and myths
and by interweaving those in your stories, you sort of either reinforce or maybe
update some of the old basic stories that our culture is based on. Right, yeah,
I think very much so. I think there really are certain universalities in this,
too, which kind of strike everybody at a very deep and basic level. And if you
could capture some of that same feeling in a story when you write it, And maybe
by employing elements consciously or unconsciously of, you know, out of
mythology, I think that you can really have a very deep emotional impact on the
reader, which I think is probably what every writer would like to do.
All right-y. Let's see here. You already answered one of my other questions, so
we'll... Uh, now we'll go ahead and add on it here. Continuing on your use of
folk tales and stuff, all of your stories that I've read seem to have a happy
ending of sorts. Is that sort of based on, most folktales have happy endings. Is
that because your stories have a basis in folktales or that you're more or less
basically an optimistic person? I think it's more that I'm basically an
optimistic person. Actually not every single one of my stories is based on a
foalt bet. A lot of them do have those elements in them but some don't. It's
just that I really hate to leave a story feeling totally depressed by it so I
think I hate to write a story that's totally depressing. Frequently I think the
stories have sort of bittersweet endings where people don't walk off hand in
hand into the sunset. They're usually dragging along a few suitcases full of
problems, too. I think the way life is, it's unrealistic, usually, to write a
totally happy ending. But I do like to have an optimistic ending. When I read
things, I relate to them on a very personal level. I get very involved in a
story. And if it's a story, the end result of which is to make me feel totally
depressed and feel like, you know, why bother to live? I really don't like being
left feeling that way, and I think I don't like feeling that way when I write,
too. Yes, you seem to get very involved with the characters you create also. Is
this because you flesh them out so well when you're writing them, or is it
because your characters are sort of variations on yourself? Well, I think
probably some of both. I think a lot of my favorite characters are, you know,
bits and pieces of me. I don't know that any one of them is all me. I think all
people have different aspects of their personality which come to the fore at
different times just in their day-to-day life. And I think when you're writing,
you can't help but inject those personalities into characters. I really do like
characters in stories. I like to read about characters who seem real. and so I
like to try and make my own characters as real as possible when I write them,
and I think, you know, by getting inside their heads, I invariably, you know,
stick a few of my thoughts in there. I do have some characters who are based on
other people I know and things like that, too, but I do like to, I like to, you
know, well, when I write about strange things and new ideas and different
societies, I like to put people who are recognizably human, even if they're
aliens, I suppose, but people that the reader can relate to into those
situations and let the reader see how the human being reacts to the strange set
of circumstances. It's not simply the strange set of circumstances which
interests me, although that's, I think, why I write science fiction, because I
don't like to write about the same old day-to-day thing. I like to explore new
ground. but I like to do it with actual characters who come as close as possible
to seem like real people. I like to see what they do in given circumstances.
Science fiction is
the only literature which allows you to speculate about the future, so it does
open up a lot of vistas that can't be explored in what we call mainstream
literature. Right. Yes, that's really what I like about science fiction.
I read my first science fiction book when I was in ninth grade. And I just
felt like, you know, boy, where has this been all my life? I was just swept away
by it. And I felt like I really hardly wanted to read anything but science
fiction after that. It was just so exciting to me too. These new worlds opened
up to me. Yeah, okay, that's... We're getting to a... Here's a story question.
Okay. Dealing with Crystal Ship and Eyes of Amber.
In two of your stories, The Crystal Ship and the Eyes of Amber, you've explored
the positive and negative aspects of a highly developed technological culture,
making contact with a more primitive culture. Were you sort of extrapolating on
contemporary aid or exploitation of world powers by lesser developed nations? or
is this more like when archaeologists or anthropologists uncover some of the
more primitive tribes in Africa and Australia, some of the things that happened
to them? Well, actually, part of that question slightly confuses me. did you
mean that more advanced cultures being, more technically advanced cultures being
exploited by less advanced cultures or vice versa? Vice versa. Let me back up.
Like in Crystal Ship, you have the extremely advanced culture on the planet with
the, I
can't remember the name of the race of the aliens. I don't either right now.
Well, good. You don't feel as bad.
They come and they take over their planet. They start exploiting the aliens, and
then the aliens give them that drug, which sends them off into Never Never Land.
Of course, their super advanced civilization collapses underneath them. But you
take the other side of the coin, and Eyes of Amber, you have the highly advanced
civilization on Earth helping the race on Titan through the use of the satellite
that they landed on Titan. And the question, what was my question here? Let me
find it again.
Was that you have taken both the positive aspect in Eyes of Amber and the
negative aspect in Crystal Ship, and was that sort of an extrapolation
on either anthropological discoveries of ancient cultures, some of those found
in Australia or Africa, are the exploitation that the world powers have done of
lesser developed third and fourth world countries. Well, gee, some of both of
those, I suppose, and just kind of my general awareness of history you know
frequently at least recent history it's frequently been the case that you know
more technologically advanced cultures decide to spread out into territories in
which the people are living at a lower level of cultural development and they
feel you know I think the original justification in Utopia by Thomas Moore was
that these people weren't making proper use of the land. Therefore we should
take it away from them and use it ourselves. I think that there's going to be
some sort of chaotic reaction whenever two societies meet. Well, even two
societies on a similar level frequently wind up fighting it out. But societies
on a different level are going to collide and create a lot of culture shock. And
it's going to change at least the less advanced society forever. Sometimes it
has effects on the more advanced society, too. Frequently, the more advanced
society is so kind of sublime in its arrogance that it really is frequently
impervious to the values of the less developed society. You know, seeing itself
as morally superior and bringing, you know, salvation to these poor, dirty
wretches. And, you know, I find that attitude rather intolerable although I
think that by the same token I think that there are things which the advanced
society can offer to the less developed society, primarily things like better
medical care and better farming methods and things like that frequently, which
can be very beneficial to the people in the less developed society, but it's
exploring the different factors and different possibilities there and seeing
what happens, you know, what is the potential for both good and evil in the
situation. I think it's the drama of the situation that appeals to me. I can't
help but make certain moral judgments when I write, you know, when I set up a
certain situation like the situation in The Crystal Ship where, you know, the
arrogant society does in fact get its comeuppance, which rarely happens usually
in human history. I think I was sort of operating off of the idea of how
European settlers had come and essentially arrested all of the North and South
American continents from the Indians, basically, and had not done much in return
but wiped them out, and the Indians had been essentially, for the most part,
defenseless in the long run against this. I had been thinking about how the
Indians had introduced the Europeans to tobacco, which is today a fairly
significant health problem, not on the same level as wiping out the entire
society. But I think that my thought from this was, what if they had introduced
something to the Europeans, which was incredibly destructive to them, if they
had brought smallpox to the Europeans instead of vice versa, what would have
been the outcome of that situation? I think that was what I was playing around
with at Crystal Ship. I guess in Eyes of Amber was the idea that, you know,
useful values or useful items even can be introduced into a culture by another
culture, and that the effects not necessarily have to be bad. But then at the
same time in that story, you also have the exploitive element, which you get in
things like as you were saying the modern day anthropologists barging in on some
here before undisturbed Stone Age tribe and putting them all on national
television and just totally disrupting their environment when they really have
no business doing anything like that. Yes. Very good answer. And it's getting
worse. We're going to edit out all the thoroughgoes. Oh yeah. yeah, we can whack
those out. In fact, if you'd like to get a drink of water or something, we can
pause for just a moment.
Okay, you mentioned,
I'm gonna take part of this, I'm gonna elaborate on your mention of Eyes of
Amber and go on to a question on music in your stories. No. Okay.
In eyes of Amber, the protagonist is a musician, a songwriter, and it seems that
music seems to play an important role in your writing. Yes it really does
actually, I seem to relate to music on a kind of subliminal level I guess,
something that operates something like mythology for me when I hear a song I
frequently get down into the song and start wondering what's going on in the
background of it you know the situation that's set up in the song leads me to
think well who are the people involved in this and how did they get here and
what is this talking about actually I tend to relate to songs in a very personal
way they have a kind of reality about them I frequently can't help thinking that
the songwriter must have written that about his or her own experience, even
though I know it's no more likely that they did than that someone writing
fiction necessarily wrote a story about their own life. But I just enjoy music
tremendously and it really stimulates creative juices for me. So I frequently do
wind up being inspired to write certain things by listening to music. In fact,
Eyes of Amber, the title of that stories. Take it from a song by Buffy Saint
Marie, which is about someone who has a demon lover and fit into the context of
the story where the alien woman thinks of the space probe as a demon and she
relates to it because it does respond to her. Although she doesn't know it's the
human beings on Earth, she relates to it as another being and has this kind of
fascination for it. It is just taking little elements like that and working them
into stories. It is one of the pleasures of writing for me.
I pause after each one of your questions because the machine and the equipment
that we have is designed for recording an incoming signal. And whenever I talk,
it records it, but it's distorted and loud and all sorts of garbage in it. So we
rerecord the questions and then edit them in. My questions will be the same
questions, as far as content goes, but they will probably be worded better than
the ones I'm actually giving you, and they will match your answers, which will
make both of us sound really smart. Sounds great.
I have no idea there are so much technical complexity involved in this. Usually,
when I do interviews, they usually wind up in the studio, you know, wind up
doing them when I'm on the spot or something like that. It's very interesting to
hear about everything that goes on at the end, actually. Yeah. Yeah, we figured
with the radio program, of course, a lot of it's left to your imagination, and
we have the distinct advantage of not having to represent any sort of visual
image and that we can just crank up and call up somebody, and talk to them over
the phone and record it, and then we process all the sounds in order to get the
telephone noise off the line, and edit it all together and put together a
program. So, it's got some good advantage and some distinct advantages to it. It
cuts our travel budget way down. Right.
Okay, this one is going to be a question about your your future history, which
it seems that you either seem to be developing or that you have developed. Okay.
That being the Outcast of Heaven's Belt, Legacy, and Media Man, and possibly
some other stories which I haven't read which might belong to that. No,
actually, I think there are only two things. Okay. But, okay, here's the
question. You've tackled one of the more difficult types of science fiction,
that being future history, as in The Outcast of Heaven's Belt, Legacy, and Media
Man. All the stories having a common background. How did your future history get
started? Well, actually, the future history kind of belongs to my ex-husband, to
tell you the truth. The idea of the situation in the outcast of Heaven's Belt,
which was the original thing that I wrote in what turned out to be that future
history, was the idea of a solar system. Another system where there was no Earth
-like planet, but only an asteroid belt and some gas giant planets, where if you
had a high enough technology level, then you could survive there in a very
luxurious way, but if you ever lost the technological level, you had no Earth
-like planet to retreat to, or you didn't have to manufacture your own air and
water and things like that. below a certain level of technological development,
you were doomed. This basic idea had been one that Werner had, and he was not
actively writing at that time. He teaches at San Diego State University, and he
was ensconced at the process of getting his tenure and things like that. so I
was the writer in the family, and he was kind of sublimating, I guess, by
helping me work with my writing, and I was at a loss for an idea at one point,
and he said, well, I have this idea if you want to write a story about it, so I
wound up writing Outcasts of Heaven and Death about this society, and then I got
the idea for the story Media Man later on. Well, I was still in the process of
doing the novel, actually, because I started making it as a novella, and then I
decided that it was not sufficiently fleshed out, and I had to make it into a
novel. But in the midst of all that, I got the idea for Media Man, which was
from a very ordinary everyday idea, which I wanted to do, you know, to take, was
the sort of the hero and the villain trapped in the middle of nowhere. And how
do you get out of it alive? I decided I wanted to take that particular situation
and make a science fiction story around it. and when I started thinking about it
I realized that the media man the sort of combination of uh of ad man and
newsman which populates the the Demarchy which is one of the societies and
heaven belt um that being the asteroid belt in the story after that the media
man was the perfect sort of person to put into this situation and it was one of
the few stories where just about everything the story kind of fell into place at
once for me I realized that it just fits just perfectly into the same future
history as the novel did. So far I have been doing a lot of different histories,
actually. I take a lot of different stories which take place in different
futures. I've just been having fun kind of playing around with that and having a
lot of different societies. But I look upon each one of those possible futures
as developing into a separate future history because if I ever find another
story that fits in to that mode, like with Tin Soldier if I ever find another
story that seems to fit perfectly with a group of women spacers I will write
another story in that future history so far the Heaven Belt Future History is
the only one that has actually produced more than one story Legacy is actually
an expansion of Media Man which combines Media Man and a sequel to Media Man
both of which are prequels and it's very complicated but I do look forward to
writing more things in that future history. I'd like to write about more about
the planet Morningside which is also involved in the story in Outcast of Heaven,
because I got a lot more background about that planet which I didn't really get
to use in the novel and I'd like to write more about that sometime.
Oh, okay. Very good. I have only scanned part of Outcast of Heaven's Belt. Is
Morningside the planet that the starship comes from? Right. Okay. Oh, yeah, by
the way, I did get Snow Queen. Oh, you did? Yeah, we found it in Dallas, and
they shipped it to us so I I have read about half of it reading rapidly along
along reading everything else at the same time and trying not to get them
confused but I have a gigantic question about snow queen which you can feel free
to cut short or talk about for the next day or whatever
here's an interjection question I don't think I've asked you this but I haven't
asked you a question about how you construct aliens have i how i do what
construct your aliens oh no okay good that's a good question here we go okay um
i'll probably move this back up uh and to the part where you were talking where
we were talking about crystal ship and eyes of amber okay but uh since you do
have a rather good background in anthropology uh how do you go about
constructing your aliens Oh, that's an interesting question, actually. I don't
think I have any particular method for constructing aliens. They frequently kind
of arise out of other givens in the situation and out of the environment. In
Eyes of Amber, the aliens, although they seemed superficially humanoid, were
actually constructed for an entirely different nitrogen-breathing
situation on a world in one of the noons of Saturn, a world which was extremely
cold, and they were tri-phibians which meant that they spent part of the time in
the sky, part of the land, part of the water. The creatures in Crystal Ship were
sort of marsupial like, and the creatures in My story to Belle, the cat thrived
on radiation. They just lived on pure radiation. They lived in essentially an
incredibly radioactively hot swamp on a planet hidden away in a cave, but
there's actually no real pattern to any of them. The creatures living in the
cave came out of the idea of there being essentially natural nuclear reactors
forming on the earth. Because there was an article somewhere about how there
seemed to be the fossil remains of one somewhere in Africa, I think. It seemed
that at some point a concentration of ore had gotten so radioactively hot that
it had actually started a thermonuclear reaction. Not a bomb, but just a
roiling, boiling situation. And so it had these creatures that had come from
whole planets like that, and had been shipwrecked, essentially, on this planet,
which would be normal to human beings. And they had managed to find this spot
and take refuge in it. And that was just... It came out of trying to think of
what sort of creatures would live in that environment. I suppose I must in
general start with the environment and then try to think about what sort of
adaptations would be necessary to it. I don't know. So aliens are one of those
things that just sort of spring out of the unconscious, I guess. I don't really
have a pattern for creating them except that I start with certain givens of the
culture. One of the problems with creating aliens is that if you make them too
alien, then the reader can't understand them or relate to them, and they just
seem to be essentially nonsensical. It's very difficult to try to convey a
feeling of alienness, and yet something that a human being can still relate to
and not simply say, what is this junk? I don't understand this. Stop reading
books. A lot of science fiction writers have talked about that. There are
frequently accusations about, well, the aliens are not really alien enough, but
then you come down to the old bottom line that if they are alien enough, even if
one human being can imagine something that alien, someone else may not be able
to understand it. and so you're always caught in the light when you're writing
about aliens. Yes, and to Belle the cat, you have created one of the, if you'll
pardon a pun or whatever, you seem to have created one of the most alien aliens
I've read about. How did you come up with the idea of, the being as I understand
it, the mind or the intelligence of the creature is down hidden away in the
cave, and it either creates or controls its mobile parts, the little creatures.
But its thought processes were amazing. What did you go through to come up with
that? Oh, this reminds me of a story about Robert Browning. A woman asked him
one time what one of his poems meant, and he said, Madam, when I wrote that,
only God and I knew what it meant. and now only God knows. I can't actually
remember how it came up with that idea. It's terrible. I don't know whether it's
in my notes anywhere or not. I think it must have grown, kind of grown out of
the idea of specialization in animals where, you know, a human being is,
biologically speaking, a very unspecialized creature because it has fingernails,
which are the most primitive form of things, as opposed to a claw or hoof, which
are adaptations, specializations of nails. There are various other things about
the human body which are, quote, primitive biologically. And I guess I may have
been thinking about specialization developing to an extreme where actual
different parts of the body became separate entities and they were all
controlled by the mind, which stayed in one spot. some of the specialized parts
were particularly strong and some were particularly agile, things like that, and
they could be sent out kind of far-ranging and controlled telepathically by the
brain, which just stayed at home in safety, and there were essentially two
levels of organism which made up one creature, and the specialized creatures
that the brain controlled had no particular brain of their own, except for a
rudimentary receiver so that it could send them its commands and could receive
back from various impressions of what they were doing. I wound up, the way they
communicate became, it was sort of like writing poetry for me. I used to like to
write poetry, and this came as close to me as I had for a long time. And then
while the brain creatures were communicating with each other, with the other
brains and discussing their plight, they were at the same time receiving input
and sending directions to all their mobiles, their little specialized parts that
were moving around the radioactive muck. And so you would get their basic
commentary and then all the levels below that of interaction. And I really
enjoyed writing about that. I thought it was quite exciting when I was doing it.
But the trouble is that I think I only found one person who actually understood,
without having it explained to them, what was going on in that story. Almost no
one else understood, and I felt like that was the case where my aliens had
gotten too alien for their own good. It was sort of frustrating in a way, but,
you know, I'm not sorry I did it, actually. It was a fascinating exercise for
me. Yeah, well, you found two. Uh, Daryl, did you understand? Three. Okay, you
found three. Oh, right!
Okay, now this is the question on Snow Queen. Okay. Okay, and feel free to
elaborate or whatever you want to do without giving away the plot. Well, to give
away the plot would take me four or five hours. Oh, okay, good, we don't have
that much time. Especially because I haven't finished it yet and I want to find
out how it ends. I'll try not to let the endings slip. But, okay. You've
undertaken another difficult writing task, that being world-building in your
novel, The Snow Queen. It's a wonderful work of science fantasy. Would you call
it science fantasy? I suppose so, actually. It is, you know, in its heart, it's
a science fiction story, but it does have heavy mythological elements, which I
think give it a fantasy-like quality. And I wasn't fighting that at all. I was
striving for a sort of fusion. MR. I think you get it. Okay. Here's the rest of
the question. Let me back up here. It has a wonderful work of science fantasy
with a very involved plot and a very exciting narrative. This must have taken a
tremendous amount of background material to develop this novel.
oh well yes probably uh oh gosh that that book was it was quite an incredible
thing for me to write that book because i i wound up being about it was over 600
pages of manuscript it's almost 200,000 words long and uh when i started writing
it i had never written a complete novel all at once with Outcast of Heaven
Belts. I had written a novella, and then I had increased in size to that of a
novel. And I was feeling kind of daunted about the very idea of writing a
normal, what I thought would be a normal-length novel of about 200 pages. But I
finally did sit down and start to write it. And the more I wrote, the more I
realized that it was not going to to stop at 200 pages, I think I had gotten
through a hundred pages and realized that I had barely gotten into the plot at
all, my writing and from then on I could only just go on and write and write and
write and see where it led me. It got more and more complicated as it went along
until I really despaired at times that I would ever be able to finish the thing.
It was a great comfort to me when I finally sat down and figured out how
everything had to fit together to get to the end of the book. Okay, I did a fair
amount of background work beforehand, but actually I wound up doing a great deal
of the work, I think, during the process of writing the book. I conceived of the
idea of the Wicked City of Carbuncle, which gets its name because it's either a
jewel or a fester, depending on your point of view. But I wanted it to be sort
of a place where all kinds of cultures from all kinds of worlds came together
and mixed and mingled and in trying to make a portrait of the city I needed a
lot of different characters with a lot of different backgrounds behind them. And
so whenever I needed a new character I would write one into the story and then
I'd kind of have to figure out where they came from. Frequently I don't lay
everything out before I actually start to write a book. I have kind of a basic
structure which I think it was being sort of like a trellis and then the story
is a line that grows up through it and fills it in and flushes it out and
things. And I think because I didn't have any idea of how big the snow clean was
going to be, it got even more complex in the process than most of the things.
Most of the things I have a clearer idea ahead of time of what they're going to
be about, but it was just so massive it was impossible to think about everything
ahead of time. It was mostly the scientific research, I think, that I did ahead
of time and reading up on black holes and things like that. I regret that black
holes and clones became such kind of stereotypes during the time in which I was
reading the book. They were not quite such archetypal sci-fi clichés when I
started writing the book as they are now. But at least since I hope the book
will appeal to a wide audience, that it's at least, maybe people who don't even
regularly read science fiction will know what I'm talking about, and I talk
about black holes and clones at this point. But I did do a fair amount of
technical reading or semi-technical reading on the nature of black holes and
using them as means of travel in order to set up the basic science fictional
premises of the book. And I did, I happened to read Robert Graves' book, The
White Goddess, just before I started writing The Snow Queen. And that, I found
that influenced me heavily in that I got a lot of the mythical fantasy-type
elements out of that and kind of wove them into the texture of the book. And I
tried to create societies which would kind of fit in with both technical and non
-technical societies, which would fit comfortably with kind of the underlying
themes and premises of the book. And from there, things just growed like
Tompsey, I guess. One of the characters who comes from a very advanced society,
the most technologically dominant society in the book, started out as a walk-on
character. His name is Gundolino, and he came along with one of the major
characters in the book, in the scene, and he just started acting up. And out of
his personality, I kind of saw a whole cultural stereotype growing. And I
realized part of, actually part of where he came from was that I had been
reading a lot of books about, I've been reading some fiction books about Romans
in Britain, because I've always been fascinated by Romans in Britain as part of
the archaeology thing, I guess. and just the kind of fascination was the sort of
science-fictional reversal where the highly cultured people are the people who
too often wind up in sword and sorcery fantasies, the kind of dark and swarthy
people and they're usually squelching around in the bushes but they were the
people who were suave and sophisticated and non-top and the people with red hair
and freckles and green eyes were running around like howling barbarians in the
brush, and I thought that was a delightful twist. Thinking about this and about
cultural arrogance and how the Romans sort of resembled the Victorian English in
that way, I just got into a mindset to write about that sort of a character, I
think. And so, you know, without even realizing this particular character just
began taking on all these aspects, and out of him I realized what his whole
culture must be like and it became one of the important societies
in the book. Just odd little things happened like that. The whole book kind of
grew up in a strange way. It was quite an indescribable thing, and if I'd known
ahead of time what I was getting into, I would never have started it. Probably
just as well that we can't see the future, I think.
Correct me if I'm wrong. I believe I read somewhere that you had some, is some
part of that novel based upon the Hans Christian Andersen story, Snow Queen? Oh,
yes, it is. As a matter of fact, that was my original inspiration for the book.
There's a cartoon and animated movie of the Snow Queen, which they occasionally
show on television. If you can wait through 15 minutes of Art Linkletter talking
to children at the beginning of it, it's really quite well done. I was
interested in it, you know, I had first seen that movie when I was in about 8th
grade and thought, oh this is silly. But when I saw it again, back during the
70s sometime, I realized what an interesting fairy tale it is. It's most fairy
tales, the thing about most fairy tales is that they are frequently degenerate
mythology. And if you know any particular amount about Near Eastern and European
mythology, you see a lot of symbolic archetypes you see ravens and stags and and
the wicked stepmother and the sweet young innocent and things like that which
you know they they all actually have their archetypes back in um in european and
near eastern mythology and that well that just as an aside that was why The
Robert Graves book on the white goddess and on all that mythology in Europe and
the New East fit in so perfectly with this particular story that Hans Christian
Andersen had written down, but was essentially one of these old tales, which are
kind of twisted-up mythology. And the thing that interested me especially about
this particular tale was that there was no prince in it. And it's usually Prince
who gets to do all the fun and exciting things like fighting the dragons and
things like that. And waking up the sleeping maiden and the women in the story
are usually either the wicked old witch or some helpless simpler and creature.
And, you know, I get sort of bored with that kind of thing. But I was very
interested, this book was quite a twist because, or this fairy tale was quite a
twist because all the main roles in it were played by women. The basic idea of
the story is that there are a little girl and a little boy who are friends, and
the little boy is stolen away by the Snow Queen, who is kind of an elemental
goddess of winter. And most of the story concerns the little girl's travels as
she's searching for him and all the people she meets. And the people she meets
are virtually all female, and the people in positions of power in the story are
women. And I thought that was quite interesting and unique. and I was in the
mood to do a story in which women played major roles in the book. And so I
thought that was a good jumping off point for it. And so from there, everything
else just started growing, basically. I read Robert Graves' book and I said,
Boy, this gives me a lot more fuel for the fire, and I just started writing at
that point. I didn't want to write a fantasy, though. I didn't want to just make
it a retelling of the fairy tale, basically. I really wanted it to be a whole
new story, and I wanted it to be science fiction as well because that's just the
way my brain works, I guess. I have written a couple of fantasy stories
recently, and I've always enjoyed reading fantasy as well as science fiction,
but so far the majority of my work has been at least technically science
fiction. Oh, you answered my next question. Did you have any fantasy stories on
the back burner? Okay, you already took care of that one. All right. We've
pretty well rolled through.